# Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel Characterisation

- Experiment conducted by: J. X. J. Bannwarth, 2019/08/01
- Report written:          J. X. J. Bannwarth, 2020/11/17

## Executive summary

This report and repository investigate the properties of the wind generated by the University of Auckland's boundary layer wind tunnel (BLWT) in three different configurations: no upstream obstruction, obstruction from a fine grid, and obstruction from a coarse grid. Measurements are recorded using a Cobra probe mounted on a traverse rig. In addition, measurements are repeated in 5 locations: at the centre of the wind tunnel, as well as 0.5 m upstream, downstream, to the left, and to the right. Data is recorded at 4 altitudes: 0.1, 0.75, 1.25, and 1.5 m.

## Experimental Setup

This section describes the physical and software set-up used to record time history data for a variety of probe locations and flow conditions.

### Physical setup

The University of Auckland's Boundary Layer Wind Tunnel (BLWT) is 3.5 m wide and 2.5 m tall. Flight experiments are to be conducted in a specific location around half-way down the length of the wind tunnel. The centre of the cross section of the wind tunnel at that location (1.25 m altitude, 1.75 m from either wall) is considered as the nominal flight location.

The tunnel has mounting points for turbulence generating grids 4 m upstream of the nominal flight location. All measurements taken for this experiments are repeated under 3 different conditions: no upstream grid, a fine grid with 0.2 m x 0.2 m holes, and a coarse grid with 0.4 m x 0.4 m holes.

A Cobra probe from [Turbulent Flow Instrumentation](https://www.turbulentflow.com.au/) (TFI) is used to record wind data. It is mounted on a motorised traverse rig, which makes it possible to change the altitude of the probe from a computer. Both the Cobra probe and the traverse rigs are connected to a Windows computer running LabVIEW and the TFI Device Control software.

In order to investigate spatial variations in flow characteristics, measurements were taken at 5 different locations and 4 different altitudes. The first location is located at the nominal flight location in the centre of the wind tunnel, while the remaining four are located 0.5 m upstream, downstream, to the left, and to the right of the nominal flight location. The four altitudes, measured between the floor of the wind tunnel and the holes of the Cobra probe, are 0.1, 0.75, 1.25, and 1.5 m.

The wind tunnel fans can be controlled from a dial. For the purpose of this test, the flow properties are measured at 4 different dial settings: 25, 35, 50, and 65%.

Thirty seconds of wind data is recorded using the Cobra probe for each combination of experimental variables. In summary, measurements are taken for 3 types of upstream obstructions, at 5 different locations and 4 different altitudes, for 4 different dial settings, yielding a total of 240 combinations, as shown in __Table 1__. This corresponds to 120 min of wind data.

__Table 1__: Experimental variables. 

| Variables            | Possible values                     |
| -------------------- | ----------------------------------- |
| Upstream obstruction | No grid, fine grid, coarse grid     |
| x/y location (m)     | 0/0, 0/+0.5, 0/-0.5, +0.5/0, -0.5/0 |
| Altitude (m)         | 0.1, 0.75, 1.25, 1.5                |
| Fan setting (%)      | 25, 35, 50, 65                      |

### Software set-up procedure

The following procedure is followed to initially set-up the system:

- Ensure the Cobra probe and the traverse rigs are connected to the PC.
- Open the `TFI Device Control` panel from the start menu.
    - Click `Settings -> Devices`. The Cobra probe DeviceID, in this case `113`, should be listed in the `Active Devices` window.
    - Ensure the probe is set to `1-Probe cable`.
    - Record the DAQ number; in this case `6255`.
- Open the `WEG Cobra` Labview program from `D:\Labview Programs\WEG Cobra\WEG Cobra.exe`.
- In `WEG Cobra`:
    - Check and record the still air temperature and pressure.

After the set-up phase, the traverse rig is moved to the desired location, the wind tunnel is switched on, and the fan control dial is set to the desired wind speed. The following procedure is then followed for each set of measurements:

- In `WEG Cobra`:
    - Set the sampling rate to 1250 Hz and the sampling time to 31.1296 s.
    - Set the traverse rig altitudes to 100, 750, 1250, and 1500 mm.
    - In the output options, check both checkboxes.
    - Set the appropriate output file name for the current test using the format `<gridType>_<location>_<dialSetting>`, where:
        - `<gridType>` is `coarsegrid`, `finegrid`, or `nogrid`, and corresponds to the type of grid mounted upstream.
        - `<location>` is `back`, `center`, `front`, `left`, or `right`, which corresponds to the location the probe is mounted at.
        - `dialSetting` is `25`, `35`, `50`, or `65`, which correspond to the percentage the wind tunnel fan control dial is set to.
        - Note: the height is appended automatically to the file name. It takes the form `_0`, `_1`, `_2`, or `_3`, which correspond to probe mounting elevations of 0.1, 0.75, 1.25, and 1.5 m respectively.
    - Zero the probe using the appropriate button before the first recording, and once again every 20-30 minutes to account for changes in ambient temperature and pressure.
- Before each recording, use `TFI Device Control` to ensure that the percentage of good data at the current wind speed and location is above 80%.
- Back in `WEG Cobra`:
    - Start the recording. The traverse rig then moves to the desired altitudes and the software records the desired amount of data.

## Results